Nb final edits overall (#25)
R4EPI/R4EPIs-website: content/outbreaks/_index.en.md

**The outbreak templates have been developed to cover four of the most common outbreak scenarios MSF teams face in our project locations. 
They include:**

* **Cholera/Acute watery diarrhea**
* **Meningitis**
* **Measles/Rubella**
* **Acute Jaundice Syndrome (often suspected to be Hepatitis E)**

Some recent examples of such outbreak responses and the data analysis done during those outbreaks is available here:

* [Cholera epidemic in Yemen, 2016–18: an analysis of surveillance data](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(18)30230-4/fulltext)
* [Invasive Meningococcal Meningitis Serogroup C Outbreak in Northwest Nigeria, 2015 - Third Consecutive Outbreak of a New Strain](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4958021/?report=reader)
* [Lessons and Challenges for Measles Control from Unexpected Large Outbreak, Malawi](https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/19/2/12-0301_article)
* [A large outbreak of Hepatitis E virus genotype 1 infection in an urban setting in Chad likely linked to household level transmission factors, 2016-2017](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0188240)

## Getting started

> **The outbreak and survey report templates are special R scripts called "R-Markdowns"**, and are included with **sitrep** package installation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The outbreak and survey report templates are special "RMarkdown" scripts**, and are included with **sitrep** package installation. 
```

> RMarkdown scripts execute data cleaning and analytical R commands AND are themselves the outline of an automatically-produced report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RMarkdown scripts give you a way of writing your analysis code and report in one document by allowing you to interleave chunks of code that the computer will run in between explanatory text meant for a person to read.
```

2. **Browse and view** your data to get a sense of your dataset structure, naming of variables, etc.
3. **Re-naming and recoding** variables to help with data analysis (i.e. creation of epidemiological weeks, recoding of age groups, application of case definitions etc.)
4. Analysis of **personal characteristics**: demographics, signs and symptoms, attack rates, risk groups etc.
5. Analysis of **temporal characteristics**: creating graphs that display different indicators in time
6. Analysis of **spatial/geographical characteristics**: creating maps

### Data cleaning and standardisation 

Epidemiologists know that data cleaning can be a challenging, laborious (but critically important) task. One goal of **sitrep** is to 
streamline data cleaning steps as much as possible. The outbreak templates are designed to efficiently import data, manage dates, 
standardise variable names and values, and otherwise set-up the datasets for analysis.

Cleaning will be the most straight-forward for datasets produced with DHIS2 software in accordance with MSF data dictionaries, but the 
**sitrep** tools are built to be used in many other scenarios. 

### Analyses 

> Situation reports for outbreaks typically focus on describing the data in terms of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Situation reports for outbreaks typically focus on describing the data in terms of **person**, **time**, and **place**.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * **Person**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * **Time**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * **Place** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**Source**: [Spina A, Lenglet A, et al.(2017) A large outbreak of Hepatitis E virus genotype 1 infection in an urban setting in Chad likely linked to household level transmission factors, 2016-2017. PLoS ONE 12(11): e0188240.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188240)

## Time characteristics

Usually the main component of this will include the creation of an "epidemic curve" which demonstrates the dynamics of the outbreak in time (by day of the outbreak or epidemiological week).

The epidemic curve will give an understanding about the mode of transmission of the outbreak in question and also possibly whether the outbreak is slowing down or still not under control.

![Number and weekly incidence rate of CSM cases treated by MSF in Kebbi and Sokoto states, February 10 – June 8, 2015](images/epicurvemeningitis.jpg?width=40pc)

> **Source**: [Chow J, et al. Invasive Meningococcal Meningitis Serogroup C Outbreak in Northwest Nigeria, 2015 – Third Consecutive Outbreak of a New Strain. PLOS Currents Outbreaks. 2016 Jul 7 . Edition 1.](10.1371/currents.outbreaks.06d10b6b4e690917d8b0a04268906143)

Reviewer: DOIs don't automatically expand to URLs. Normally, I would just put https://doi.org at the beginning of the DOI, but for some reason this DOI is broken.

```suggestion
**Source**: [Chow J, et al. Invasive Meningococcal Meningitis Serogroup C Outbreak in Northwest Nigeria, 2015 – Third Consecutive Outbreak of a New Strain. PLOS Currents Outbreaks. 2016 Jul 7 . Edition 1.](http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/index.html%3Fp=66532.html)
```

![Cholera in Yemen, 2017](images/cholerayemen.png?width=40pc)

**Source**: [MSF calls for increased response to cholera outbreak](https://www.msf.ie/article/yemen-msf-calls-increased-response-cholera-outbreak)

## Example data included in the templates

The outbreak templates are constructed so that you can run them with no modifications 
and they will produce a report based on an internally-generated example dataset. This helps you understand how the reports are produced 
and begin your modifications from a functioning template.

## Other uses of the templates

Code and **sitrep** functions included in the outbreak templates can also be used to help guide you through epidemiological analyses on other data, such as:

* outpatient registers
* hospital registers
* other surveillance data

The data dictionaries may not be applicable to these other use-cases, but you should be able to similarly recode and rename variables, create graphs and tables of relevant variables and if necessary generate maps.

> There is also coding to be able to guide you on conducting simple statistical comparisons between groups (chi square, t-test etc.), as well as the calculation of Odds Ratios (ORs) and Risk Ratios (RR) and running regression models for multivariate analyses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also code to help you conduct simple statistical comparisons between groups (chi square, t-test etc.), as well as the calculation of Odds Ratios (ORs) and Risk Ratios (RR) and running regression models for multivariate analyses.
```
